To the north of the Ganga was the great 
kingdom Kosala, made fertile by the river
Sarayu. Its capital was Ayodhya, built by
Manu, the famous ruler of the Solar
dynasty. From Valmiki's description of
the capital Kosala, it is clear that ancient
Ayodhya was not inferior to our modern
cities. Even in ancient India city
civilisation had reached a high level.
King Dasaratha ruled the kingdom
from the capital city of Ayodhya. He had 
fought on the side of the Devas, and his
fame spread in the three worlds. He was
the equal of Indra and Kubera. The people 
of Kosala were happy, contented and
virtuous. The land was protected by a
mighty army, and no enemy could come
anywhere near
It contained forts with moats around
them as well as many defensive
intallations, and true to its name, Ayodhya 
defied all enemies. (Ayodhya means that
which cannot be subdued by war).
Dasaratha had eight wise ministers, ever
ready to advise him and execute his
orders. Great sages like Vasishtha and
Vamadeva and other Brahmanas taught
the dharma and performed rituals and
sacrifices.
Taxes were light and punishment of
crime was just and inflicted according to
the capacity of the wrong-doer. 
Surrounded by the best counsellors and
statesmen, the king's splendor shone as the 
rising sun. Many years rolled smoothly
by. In the midst of all this prosperity
Dasaratha had one regret; he had no son.
One day in early summer he thought of
performing a horse sacrifice for progeny.
He consulted his religious masters and on
their advice, got sage Rishyasringa to
perform the Yaga. The Yaga was a grand 
affair and the invitees included many of
the kings of the day. It was no easy thing
to perform yagas. The location and
erection of the sacrificial platform had to
be attended to in detail strictly according
to prescribed rules. There were experts
whose guidance was sought in arranging
things.
It meant the building of a new campcity, capable of accommodating tens of
thousands and providing hospitality and
entertainment for the invitees who
included the princes and sages of the land. 
In short, yagas in those days were
something like our present-day State sponsored big scale conferences and
exhibitions.
When all arrangements were complete
the ceremonies were set in motion strictly
as enjoined by the Shastras.
Contemporaneously with the yaga in
Ayodhya, there was a conference of the
Devas in heaven. The Devas complained
to Lord Brahma that Ravana, king of the
demons, drunk with the power acquired
by the boon granted to him by Brahma,
was causing them untold misery and
hardship. They represented to Brahma: "It
is beyond our capacity to subdue, conquer 
or kill Ravana. In the security of your
boon, he has grown wicked and insolent
and ill-treats all, even women. His desire
is to dethrone Indra. You are our only
refuge and it is for you to devise a method 
by which Ravana can be slain and his
despotism ended."
Brahma knew that he had granted to
Ravana the boon prayed for by him that
he should be invulnerable and invincible
against Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas and
other such beings. In his arrogance,
Ravana did not care to ask for security
against mankind. As Brahma revealed this
fateful omission all the Gods rejoiced and
turned to Vishnu.
Absolutely surrendering themselves to
Hari, the Devas begged him to be born as 
a man and put an end to Ravana and his 
atrocities. Hari agreed and assured the
Devas that he would be born as four sons 
of King Dasaratha who was then
performing a sacrifice for progeny. As the 
ghee was poured into the fire and the
flames shot up to meet it, from out of the 
flames came a majestic figure, resplendent
like the noonday sun, holding a bowl of
gold.
Calling King Dasaratha by his name,
the figure said: "The Devas are pleased
with you and are answering your prayer.
Here is payasam sent by the gods for your 
wives. You will be blessed with sons if
they drink this divine beverage." With joy
unbounded, Dasaratha received the bowl
as he would receive a child and distributed 
the payasam to his three wives, Kausalya, 
Sumitra and Kaikeyi.
He asked Kausalya to drink a half of
the payasam and he gave a half of what
remained to Sumitra. Half of what was
then lift was drunk by Kaikeyi, and what
remained was given to Sumitra again.
Dasaratha's wives were happy, even as a
beggar suddenly coming upon buried
treasure. And in due course all of them
were expectant mothers.
