THE King embraced Rama, seated him
beside him on the throne and said: "I am
old. I have enjoyed my life as a man and a 
king. I have discharged all my duties to
my ancestors. There is nothing left for me 
to do. My only desire is to install you on
the throne of our fathers. Last night I had 
bad dreams. Those who read, the future
advise me that a great sorrow, even death, 
may overtake me very soon. Hence I wish 
to have the coronation performed 
tomorrow. Tomorrow, the readers of the
stars say, is auspicious. Something within
me says, 'Do this at once.' You and Sita
should prepare for tomorrow's anointment
by fasting tonight. Lie down on a bed of
darbha grass and have trusty and vigilant
friends to look after your safety. It seems 
to me that the present time when Bharata 
is away is particularly opportune for your
installation. Not that I do not know that
Bharata is the soul of righteousness in
thought and conduct alike, and that he is
devoted to you, but the minds of men are 
changeful and open to unexpected
influences."
And so the King decided that the
coronation should be performed on the
very next day and told Vasishtha of his
decision. Bad dreams added to the reasons 
for fixing the day for the coronation at
once.
Taking leave of his father, Rama went
to Kausalya's apartment to give her the
news and seek her blessing. But the
Queen had heard the news already.
Sumitra, Sita and Lakshmana were all
there with Kausalya, who, clad in
ceremonial white, sat offering prayers for
her son.
Rama reported to his mother the King's 
latest command. She answered: "This I
have heard. May you live long. Be a good 
ruler. Conquer your foes and protect your 
subjects and kinsfolk. You have pleased
your father and you have made me
happy."
Then bidding farewell to his mother
and step-mother, Rama went to his own
apartment. As directed by the King,
Vasishtha came to Rama's place. He was
welcomed by him at the entrance,
Vasishtha initiated Rama with due
mantras in his pre-coronation fast.
As Vasishtha returned to the King, he
saw groups of people on the royal road,
cheerfully discussing the great festival of
the morrow. Houses were being decorated 
with flowers, festoons and flags. It was
with difficulty that Vasishtha could make
his way through the crowds to the King's
palace. The King was pleased to hear that 
the fast had begun duly and all was being
got ready for the ceremony.
But in his heart of hearts there was a
fear that some mishap might come
between him and his one wish.
The city was in a joyous commotion of
expectancy. In every house, in every
street, men, women and children looked
on the coronation as a great and
auspicious occasion in their own lives and
awaited it with enthusiasm.
Rama and Sita in their dwelling 
meditated long on Narayana, fed with
ghee the sacrificial fire, and reverently
sipped what remained of the ghee, and
slept on grass spread on the floor. Early
the following morning, they were roused
from slumber by music and held
themselves in readiness to proceed to the
palace and in expectation of the
auspicious call.
But the summons that came was of an
entirely opposite nature.
In accordance with the practice in royal 
households, Queen Kaikeyi had a woman
companion and confidential servant. She
was a hunchback named Manthara. Being
a distant relation of the Queen, she
claimed great intimacy with her.
Manthara is one of the best known
characters in the Ramayana. Every man,
woman and child in our land knows and
detests her, as the cause of Rama's exile, 
Dasaratha's death and all the sorrows
which befell the royal family.
On the day on which Dasaratha
summoned the Assembly and decided to
anoint Rama as Yuvaraja, Manthara
happened to climb up to the terrace of the 
women's apartments and stood surveying
the town below. She saw the streets were 
sprinkled with water and gaily decorated.
Flags flew from the house-tops. Wearing
new clothes and bright jewels, smeared
with sandal paste and decked in flowers,
people moved about in crowds, engrossed 
in happy talk.
Musical instruments played in the
temples. Manthara could not understand
the reason for all this, for she did not
know what the King had decided. Some
celebration was on, she guessed. Manthara 
turned to a servant and asked her: "Why
are you wearing this silk dress? What is
on in the City? Kausalya seems to be
distributing gifts to Brahmanas. She is a
thrifty lady and would not be doing this
for nothing. There are festive sights and
sounds everywhere. Do you know what all 
this is about?"
The little servant girl answered,
dancing with joy: "Why, do you not know
that our Ramachandra is going to be
anointed Yuvaraja tomorrow morning?"
This was news! Manthara was
overpowered with sudden anger. Quickly
she hobbled downstairs. Straight she
entered Kaikeyi's room. Kaikeyi was
resting on her bed.
"Rise, rise, foolish woman! A flood of
misfortune is rising to drown and swallow
you! You are betrayed and ruined. Your
star is setting. Foolish girl, is this the time 
to sleep?"
Kaikeyi, fearing that some calamity
had overtaken Manthara, asked her gently:
"What is troubling you? Why are you thus 
upset?"
And the clever Manthara began:
"Destruction has come upon both you and 
me, my girl. Dasaratha has decided to
make Rama Yuvaraja, the real ruler of this 
land. What greater cause for sorrow need I 
have? When grief comes to you, how can
I remain unconcerned? I have come
running to you. You were born and bred
in a royal family. You were married into a 
royal family. Now, alas, all is over. Like
the simple woman you are, you have been 
deceived. Your husband has cheated you
with sweet words. It is a deep plot, as any 
one can see. He put Bharata out of the
way by sending him to the distant place of 
his uncle, and is taking advantage of his
absence by hurriedly crowning Rama. By
tomorrow it will all be over. And you
watch all this, lying in bed and doing
nothing, while you and all who depend on
you are being destroyed."
And so, Manthara went on talking.
Kaikeyi's ears heard the words without
quite heeding their drift. Like the rest of
the royal household her mind was
overwhelmed now with the joyous
expectation of Rama's coronation, for she
loved and esteemed Rama like everybody
else.
"Manthara, you have brought me good
news," she said. "Is my son Rama to be
crowned tomorrow? What greater joy can 
come to me? Here, take this. Ask me for 
anything else." So saying, Kaikeyi took
the necklace off her neck and gave it to
Manthara. It was a royal custom at once to 
reward with a rich gift the bringer of any
important good news.
Kaikeyi thought Manthara, like any
other officious personal attendant, was
ingratiatingly jealous in her mistress's
interests. How could this woman
understand the goodness of Rama, or
affairs of State? And so she thought her
foolish fears would be banished if she saw
that her mistress was happy at the event.
Kaikeyi's mind was still uncorrupted. She
had the culture of her noble lineage and
was not easily amenable to low thoughts.
This but increased Manthara's grief.
She flung away the necklace and said:
"Woe to you, stupid woman. All is lost
and stupidly you laugh with joy. How can
you be blind to the misfortune that is
coming to you? Am I to laugh or cry at
this folly? Your rival, Rama's mother, has
conspired to making him King. And you
jump with joy. Insane woman! What
would be Bharata's state when Rama
reigns? Would not Rama fear and ever
look upon Bharata as a dangerous enemy? 
Rama knows human nature. He knows
that Bharata alive would be a constant
threat to his power and therefore must be 
killed. Does not one kill a cobra out of
fear? Hereafter there is no security for
Bharata's life. Tomorrow morning
Kausalya will be a happy woman and you
will bend before her as a well-dressed 
slave. You will stand before her, hands
clasped in obedience. From tomorrow
your son too will be a subject and a slave. 
In these apartments there will be no more 
honor or joy."
And she stopped, unable for grief to
continue. Kaikeyi heard all this and
wondered "Why should Manthara have
such fears? Does she not know Rama? Is 
he not dharma embodied in human form?"
She said: "Manthara, have you not
known and rejoiced in Rama's
truthfulness, right conduct and humility?
He is the elder prince and he gets the
kingdom. Bharata will get it one day after 
him. What is wrong with all this? Why,
dear friend, do you feel such grief? After 
Rama, Bharata will reign for a hundred
years. Do not cry. You know how
affectionate Rama is to me. Indeed he
cares for me more than for his own
mother. Does not Rama hold his brothers
as dear as life? It is not right that you
should fear any harm from Rama."
"Alas, Alas!" said Manthara. "Why are
you so foolish? Once Rama is crowned
king, what chance has Bharata? Do you
not know the rule of succession? When
Rama ascends the throne all prospects of
royalty for Bharata and his line are at an
end. After Rama, Rama's son will be king, 
and after him that son's son will be king,
and so the succession will go on. Eldest
son succeeds eldest son. There is no
chance for a younger brother, no matter
how good or manly he is. My dear, you
know not even this. What is one to do?"
"Once Rama is crowned," she
continued, "he will not leave Bharata
alone. There will be danger to Bharata's
life. If you want Bharata to live, advise
him to remain away, an exile from home;
for if he returns he will be coming to his 
death. It would be safest for him to leave 
even his uncle's house, and hide his head
in obscurity in some more distant land.
And Kausalya is no friend of yours. She
bears you a grudge because you are the
King's favorite and have often slighted
her. And now she is sure to wreak
vengeance on you. You know the wrath of 
a rival wife is a raging fire when it finds
its chance. You may take it that, if Rama 
is king, Bharata is as good as dead.
Therefore, think hard. Be firm. Decide
something and stick to it. Somehow 
Bharata must be crowned. Rama must be
banished from the kingdom."
Fear now entered the heart of the
Queen. Manthara won. Kaikeyi's face was 
flushed; her breath became hot. Helpless
she clung to Manthara for comfort and
safety.
Because his first two wives had borne
no children, Dasaratha, following the
royal custom, married Kaikeyi. At that
time Kaikeyi's father secured from
Dasaratha the promise that the child of her 
womb should become king after him. In
such a promise given by a childless king
there was nothing surprising and nothing
wrong. At that time, his then queens had
long been childless. The King took a third 
wife for the sake of progeny. Even then
his wish for a son to be born was not
fulfilled. Many years passed.
After the great sacrifice was 
performed, all three wives bore children.
The son of the Queen Eminent, Rama,
was the eldest among four sons. He was
also great in virtue, fully equal to the
burden of Kingship, acceptable to
ministers, citizens and vassal princes.
How could Dasaratha violate the royal
custom and ignoring Rama's claim anoint
Bharata?
Moreover, neither Bharata nor Kaikeyi
had ever thought of or wished for the
fulfilment of this old and forgotten
promise. During all the intervening years,
no word had been spoken on this subject. 
Hence the King thought there could be no 
difficulty in installing Rama as Yuvaraja
in accordance with the custom of the
dynasty and public expectation. And there
was no cloud in Kaikeyi's mind. This is
clear from Kaikeyi's behavior. And
Bharata was too noble to raise this
question.
And, yet, as Dasaratha told Rama, even 
the purest of minds is mutable. When fate 
conspires with bad counsel, any one of us 
might be corrupted. And this happened to 
Kaikeyi. The gods in Heaven had received 
an assurance, and the sages had performed 
tapas or the destruction of Ravana. What
we call destiny, therefore, ordained that
Kaikeyi's pure heart should be changed by 
Manthara's evil counsel. So says Kamban
in the Tamil Ramayana in his own
inimitable style.
Fearing that delay might bring some
unpredictable obstacles, Dasaratha had
ordered the coronation to be done without 
waiting for Bharata's return to the capital.
This same fear and hurry were used by
Manthara to persuade Kaikeyi to take the 
wrong path. "Think, my Queen. Why this 
haste? Why does your husband rush
through the ceremony when your son is
absent? Is it not to cheat him of his right? 
Is not the motive plain? The King
pretends to be enamored of you. But this 
is only his hypocritical shrewdness."
Thus tempted, Kaikeyi thought over
Manthara's advice. Kaikeyi was weak like 
any other woman. She had good feeling
and good culture, besides a keen intellect. 
But she had little knowledge of the world. 
She was also terribly obstinate. Easily
deceived, she did not have the power to 
foresee the full consequences of her
action. Thus began the charter of grief in
the Ramayana.
