Kaikeyi, who had looked upon Rama
as her own son, was enmeshed in
Manthara's arguments and became
helpless.
"Indeed, I am afraid," she said. "Tell
me what we should do. Am I to be a
servant to Kausalya? Never, Bharata must 
be crowned. You are quite right. And
Rama must be sent to forest. But how
shall we get all this done? Tell me. You
are clever and know the way."
And she clung to Manthara. In
Kaikeyi's eyes at that time Manthara's
crooked frame appeared handsome. This
is not a joke; it is a subtle psychological
phenomenon,
"This is indeed strange, Kaikeyi," said
Manthara. "Is it for me to tell you how
this could be brought about? Have you 
really forgotten? Or, are you only
pretending? But if you want me to say it, I 
shall do so. Listen."
And then she paused. Kaikeyi, all
impatient, cried: "Tell me, tell me.
Somehow Bharata must be crowned and
Rama's coronation must be stopped."
"Very well," said Manthara, "I shall tell
you. Do not be impatient. You remember
how your husband Dasaratha, long ago,
fought against Sambara in the South? And 
you were with him, were you not? Your
husband went, did be not, to help Indra?
Sambara of Vaijayanti was too powerful
for Indra, who sought Dasaratha's help.
Did not Dasaratha get wounded in battle
and lose consciousness? Then, you drove
his chariot skilfully out of the battlefield,
gently removed the arrows from his body
and revived him and saved his life. Have 
you forgotten all this? And what did be
tell you then? He told you in gratitude:
'Ask me for two boons. I shall give you
anything you want.' Then you answered: 'I 
shall ask for my boons later. I want
nothing now.' Then he promised, did he
not, 'You will have your two gifts
whenever you want them'? You told me
all this long ago yourself. You may have
forgotten it, but I have not. The time has
arrived to get him to redeem his promise. 
Demand that he should crown Bharata
instead of Rama. This will be the first of
two gifts he promised. For the second gift, 
ask that Rama be sent to the forest for
fourteen years. Do not be frightened. Do
not fear to ask. Do not think it sinful to
demand this. Do what I tell you. It is only 
if Rama is sent into the forest that his hold 
on the people will relax and disappear in
course of time and your son's position will
be secure. Go now and lie down in the
sulking room. Throw away your fine dress 
and your jewels, wear an old sari and
stretch yourself on the floor. When the
King enters the room, do not speak to
him. Do not even look at him. I am sure 
he cannot endure your sorrow. You will
then have your way with him. The King
will try to get round you. Do not yield. He 
will offer many alternatives. Accept none
of them. Insist on the two boons. Be firm. 
Bound by his promise the King will
finally come round. I know how
passionately he loves you. He would give
up his life for your sake. To please you he 
would jump into fire. Do what I tell you.
Do not be afraid. Unless Rama is sent to 
the forest, your wish will not be fulfilled.
Rama must be sent away. Only then the
position you get for Bharata will be real
and lasting. Remember this and mind you
do not weaken."
Listening to this exhortation, Kaikeyi's
face shone with hope. "What a brain you
have, Manthara," exclaimed Kaikeyi.
"You have been the saving of me." And
she jumped about in joy like a filly.
Manthara repeated again and again that 
Rama must be sent to the forest. "Do not 
delay. What needs to be done, do at once. 
It is no good strengthening the tank-bund 
after the waters have flown out.
Remember what I have told you.
Everything depends on your firmness.
Victory is yours if you do not yield."
Kaikeyi assured Manthara of her
firmness and forthwith entered the sulking
room, removed her jewels and scattered
them on he floor, changed her clothes and 
stretched herself on the floor. Then,
assuming a broken voice, she said:
"Manthara, you will yourself carry the
news to my father Kekaya. You will
yourself tell him one of two things: either 
that Bharata is to be crowned or that
Kaikeyi is dead. My dear, dear
Manthara!"
Kaikeyi in her anger believed that
Dasaratha had really been treacherous to
her. Even then, stretched on the ground
divesting herself of all ornaments and
putting on a face of grief and anger, she
looked inexpressibly beautiful. So great
was her beauty.
The sinful thought had found lodgment
in her mind and her whole nature was
transformed. The fear that she would lead 
a slave's life, and that even Bharata's life
was in peril, had got hold of her. For the 
first time in her life she cast aside the
sense of shame and sin and hardened her 
heart. Heaving heavy sighs, perspiring,
and with eyes closed, Kaikeyi, beautiful
like a Naga goddess, unbraided her hair
and lay on the floor with dishevelled
tresses and sprawling like a bird shot
down by a hunter. The flowers and
shining jewels, which once adorned her
person, lay scattered in the dark room like 
stars in the midnight sky.
Having dismissed the Assembly and
given orders for the due celebration of the 
coronation ceremony, Dasaratha, relieved
of care and wishing to relax, sought the
apartments of his favorite consort. He had 
decided on the coronation of Rama after
receiving the approval of all those who
had a right to be consulted and he felt
happy and free, as after laying down a
heavy burden.
He entered Kaikeyi's chamber to tell
her the happy news and spend in pleasant 
talk the night before the coronation. The
junior queen's residence was a beautiful
palace with lovely gardens and tanks, 
birds playing in the water and peacocks
dancing with tails spread out and trees
resplendent with bright flowers. In
Dasaratha's happy mood it appeared
unusually beautiful that night.
Like the full moon rising brightly
before an eclipse, without knowing of the 
eclipse that lies in wait for her, the poor
old King entered Kaikeyi's dwelling with
a beaming face. The incense pots and
drinks were in their usual places but he
did not see the Queen whom he was eager 
to meet.
Of all his consorts Kaikeyi was the one 
whose company he sought for joyous
relaxation from all cares of state, for she
never interfered in public affairs, and
always waited for him at the entrance and 
welcomed him with a warm embrace. But, 
today, she was nowhere to be found.
The King was perplexed. He went
around and looked in vain for her in all
her favorite haunts thinking that she was
playing a sweet game of hide and seeks.
He did not find her. This sort of thing had 
never happened before! He asked a
maidservant where the Queen was.
Folding her hands in reverence, the girl
said: "Lord, the Queen is angry. She is in
the inner chamber."
The surprised King entered the room.
And he saw a sight which amazed and
distressed him, for there she lay on the
bare floor, with draggled robes and
disheveled hair, like one in mortal pain.
She seemed too full of anguish even to
look at him as he entered.
The poor guileless King, all
unconscious of having given any cause for 
offence, behaved with the doting fondness
of an old husband and seating himself by
her on the floor stroked her hair and
strove to console her with loving words
and caresses:
"What has come over you? Are you ill? 
Do you feel any pain? Have I not the best 
doctors in the land? I shall send for them
at once. They can cure any malady. Do
not be afraid."
Kaikeyi sighed heavily, but would not
speak.
The King proceeded: "Was anyone in
the palace guilty of discourteous
behavior? Tell me and I shall punish him.
Did anyone slight you or was there
anything you wanted which I neglected to
give you? Tell me."
In this way, he mentioned faults that
might have occurred in the running of a
big house and asked her what the matter
was and why she was upset. Kaikeyi paid 
no attention to his questions and was mute 
like one possessed.
The King begged her more
importunately: "State your wish. It shall
be done. Do you want anyone punished? I 
shall punish him. Do you want anyone
freed from punishment? I shall free him,
even if he be a murderer. You know my
absolute authority, I can give and I can
take, as I please. Anything, to anyone, I
can do what I wish. Ask me anything and 
it shall be done at once."
Kaikeyi sat up. The King was pleased. 
And she began: "No one slighted or
dishonored me. But there is something
which you can do and you must do it for 
my sake. Give me your word that you will 
fulfil my desire. Then I shall tell you what 
it is."
Hearing this, the unsuspecting old man
was filled with joy. Possessing absolute
powers, he had no doubt that he could
fulfil her wishes whatever they were, and
so boldly and joyously he said: "Well,
Kaikeyi, tell me your wish. It shall be
done. I swear it. I swear it on all I love
most on you, the dearest among women,
and on Rama, dearest to me among men! I 
swear in the name of Rama: Whatever you 
desire, I shall do, I promise, I swear."
Guileful wickedness and trustful
misfortune were reaching the climax in
their unequal encounter. The King's
swearing in the name of Rama filled
Kaikeyi with supreme delight. She was
now sure that she had won, for the King
would never break a promise coupled with 
that beloved name.
"Do you promise? Very well!" she
exclaimed. "Swear again in the name of
Rama that you will do what I wish
without fail. Swear it!"
The King said: "My beloved queen, I
promise. I swear it on Rama. Whatever
you wish I shall do. This is my sworn
word."
At this stage, as she thought of the
tremendousness of her intended request,
Kaikeyi's heart misgave her and she
feared that on hearing it her horrorstricken husband would exclaim: 'God
forbid! No oath or promise is strong
enough to justify so heinous a sin!' and
recoil from her with abhorrence.
She stood erect and with folded hands, 
turning in the four directions, invoked in a 
solemn voice the heavenly powers to
witness and confirm the oath: "Oh, Ye
Gods! You have heard and witnessed the 
promise given to me by my husband. Sun, 
Moon and Planets, you are my holy
witnesses. Ye, Five Elements! You have
heard the promise. He who has never
broken his word, my husband, has sworn
to do my wish. Bear witness to this."
Dasaratha was looking at her with
hungry, joyous eyes. She knew her man
and she began boldly: "Do you remember, 
King, how, when long ago in the field of
battle you were about to lose your life, I
drove your chariot in the dark night, took 
you out of the battlefield, removed the
arrows from your body and comforted and 
revived you? When you came out of your 
faint, you said something, did you not?
You said: 'You have restored to me the
life which my foes had taken from me. I
shall give you any two gifts you ask.'
Then I said: 'I want nothing now. It is joy 
enough now for me that you are alive. I
shall ask for my gifts later.' Do you
remember this?"
The King answered: "Yes, I do
remember this. Ask for your two gifts.
You shall have them now."
Kaikeyi said: "Remember you have
made a vow. You have given a pledge.
You have sworn in the name of Rama.
The gods and the five elements have
witnessed your promise. I shall state my
wishes. Your ancestors never broke their
word. Prove yourself their worthy
descendant by being true to the word you 
have given. With the preparations now
afoot for the coronation, crown my son
Bharata. This is my first wish. The second 
boon that I demand is, send your son
Rama to live in the Dandaka forest for
fourteen years. Remember your solemn
vow that you cannot break. The good
fame of your great dynasty is in your
hands."