ACCOMPANIED by the fourteen
generals of Khara, Surpanakha came back 
to Rama's ashrama, determined to avenge
herself and drink the blood of the princes. 
Pointing to the two young men, she told
her escort, "Look, there stand the men
who insulted and mutilated me. Slay them
immediately."
Rama understood the situation at once
and told Lakshmana: "Take care of Sita
for a while, while I deal with those
fellows."
Saying this, he took up his bow.
Following the prevailing rules of war,
Rama announced himself to Khara's
generals and said, "Tell us the reason that 
you come here. Know that we are here in 
the forest at the bidding of the rishis for
the purpose of destroying their enemies. If
you wish to escape with life, leave us
alone."
But the Rakshasas wanted not peace,
but war. And the battle began. It did not 
take long for Rama's arrows to annihilate
the Rakshasa generals.
Once again, lamenting loudly,
Surpanakha went to Khara. The
destruction of the powerful detachment he
had sent was inconceivable. He could not 
believe it. He sought to soothe his
disturbed sister with soft words.
"I have sent warriors unconquerable,
each one like Yama. They must have by
now fulfilled their mission. Why do you
weep'? Why need you bewail while I am
here?"
Surpanakha rose, and wiping the tears
from her eyes, said: "True, you sent your
fourteen warriors with me. But the
fourteen now lie stiff and cold in death,
slain by Rama, whose skill with weapons
baffles description. If you have a spark of
pride in you, start at once, fight with
Rama and save the Rakshasa race. If you
do not, the destruction of our people is
certain. But if you are afraid, tell me so
and I shall understand. These young men
who have entered your satrapy are
determined to destroy your race, unless
you first meet and destroy them."
These words, spoken by his sister in a 
loud voice before all his courtiers, pierced 
Khara's heart.
"Why do you speak thus terrified by a 
puny human being? Hold yourself in
patience for a moment and you will have
his blood to drink." So saying, Khara rose.
"Do not go alone!" she said. "Take
your army with you."
Khara gave orders accordingly. A great 
army, fully armed, went in advance under
the leadership of Dushana. Behind the
army Khara proceeded majestically in a
chariot. On the way he met with many bad 
omens which affected the spirits of his
host. He laughed and reassured his army,
saying:
"Never have I been so far defeated in
battle. Do not mind these portents. We
shall soon crush these two little men and
return in triumph."
The army took heart at these bold
words of their leader.
Hearing the tumultuous noise of the
approaching army, Rama and Lakshmana
prepared for battle. Rama told
Lakshmana: "Do you see the signs? It is
certain that the Rakshasas of Janasthana
are coming here to their death! I see in
your face the glory of the victory that
awaits us. Arm yourself and take Sita with 
you to a cave in the hill and look after her. 
I shall encounter the Rakshasa hordes and 
destroy them. Go at once. I do not require 
any help." Saying this, Rama put on his
armor and strung his bow.
Lakshmana did as Rama bade and took 
Sita to a mountain cave.
A great battle was to follow. So the
Devas and Gandharvas hovered in the
heavens to watch the fight. They uttered
benedictions and prayed for Rama's 
victory. The rishis had misgivings. How
was Rama, standing single, to meet and
quell this huge army? As Rama stood
there, bow in hand, the radiance of his
face was like that of Rudra himself when
he bent his great bow Pinaka.
The Rakshasa force advanced in proud 
array, with drums and trumpets and the
clanking pageantry of war filling the
quarters with clamor and causing the
denizens of the forest to stampede in all
directions. Rama stood holding his bow
with his band on the string. Like great
black clouds disturbing the sun the
Rakshasa hordes surrounded him.
The battle began. But while even the
Devas wondered how he could withstand
the yelling masses which rushed on him, a 
constant stream of deadly arrows sped
from his bow before which the Rakshasa
ranks withered and fell like moths before
a blazing fire.
Dushana himself now stood in front of
Rama. Rama bent his bow and sent his
shafts in all directions in an unceasing
stream. Like rays from the sun, and with
the speed of light, arrows shot out from
the spot where Rama stood, spread out in
all directions and brought down warriors,
chariots, elephants and horses.
The shafts pierced the bodies of the
Rakshasas and came out, covered with
their blood shining like fire. The army
was utterly destroyed and Rama stood
still, like Siva at the end of Time.
Dushana came again with another great 
army. For a while he seemed indomitable. 
But soon Rama's arrows laid low his
chariot, drivers and horses. He jumped
down and sprang towards Rama. Rama's
arrows, however, severed his arms from
his trunk. And the monster fell dead on
the ground like a huge elephant. Other
Rakshasas, who saw Dushana falling,
rushed against Rama and were also slain
by the arrows that sped from his Kodanda 
bow.
In this way, the whole army of Khara 
was destroyed. It had come roaring like an 
ocean and now it lay still, a mass of
corpses and severed limbs and derelict
weapons and broken chariots.
Only Khara and Trisiras remained. As
Khara rushed forward to meet Rama,
Trisiras stopped him saying: "I shall go
first and kill Rama. Or else, I shall be
killed. After I am dead, you may meet
him."
The three-headed Rakshasa mounted
on his chariot attacked Rama with his
arrows. Rama met them with arrows that
hissed like deadly serpents. At last
Trisiras collapsed and fell spitting blood.
His followers fled like deer.
Khara, seeing this, cried: 'Hold' to the
fugitives and directed his chariot against
Rama. His confident pride was gone but
he fought manfully. The shafts sent by the 
two warriors covered the sky. Khara stood 
like Yama in his chariot, sending his
stream of arrows. For an instant, Rama
leaned on his bow. In that interval Rama's 
armor was pierced by Khara's arrows and 
showed the prince's body shining like the
sun.
Rama now took up the bow of Vishnu
and laid low Khara's chariot and cut his
bow in twain. Khara then took his mace
and approached Rama. The Devas and
rishis watching the battle became anxious
and renewed their benedictions.
"You have been a terror and a plague
to mankind!" exclaimed Rama. "Strength 
of body is no protection to an evil-doer. 
You have persecuted and killed rishis
engaged in penance in the forest. You will
now receive the punishment due for these
sins of yours. The spirits of the rishis
whose flesh you fed on are now
witnessing your punishment from their
aerial chariots. I have come to the
Dandaka forest to destroy wicked
Rakshasas. My arrows will pierce the
bodies of all your kinsfolk. Your head will
soon roll on the ground like a ripe fruit."
"Human worm!" exclaimed Khara.
"Son of Dasaratha! Have done with
boasting! You are proud because you have 
killed a few common Rakshasas. A hero
boasts not as you do. Only a Kshatriya
banished by his people can talk boasting
like this. You have shown you can brag.
Let us see now if you can fight! Your
words have blazed up like burning straw
with little heat or life. Here I stand mace
in hand, like Yama to take your life.
Evening approaches. Be prepared to lose
your life. I am here to avenge the death of 
these my followers whom you have
killed."
So saying, he whirled his mace, and
hurled it at Rama. The mace was split by
Rama's arrows into splinters which fell
harmless on the ground. "Have you
finished speaking, Rakshasa? Now you
shall die. This forest will be safe hereafter 
and the rishis will live in peace," said
Rama.
Even while Rama was speaking, Khara 
pulled out by its roots a huge tree, and
gnashing his teeth, threw it at Rama. But
this too Rama split by his arrows. And
fearing further delay, he aimed deadly
darts at Khara. The wounded Rakshasa 
sprang on Rama intending close combat
with him. But the latter avoided contact
by stepping back and laid him dead with a 
shaft which clove his breast.
The Devas showered flowers from on
high and cried in joy: "Rama has killed
the sinful Rakshasa. Men can live in peace 
in the Dandaka forest hereafter. Within an
hour Rama has destroyed Khara, Dushana, 
Trisiras and their whole army. Indeed he
is a hero."
Sita and Lakshmana returned from the
cave. Lakshmana embraced Rama and
rejoiced that single-handed he had 
fulfilled the promise of safety he had
given to the rishis.
How did Rama all alone perform these 
feats? If one observes a cow guarding her 
calf and scattering a whole crowd of men, 
one can realise the power of love. Love is 
a supreme quality which according to
occasion manifests itself in diverse heroic
forms such as valor and self-sacrifice, just 
like gold which can be changed for silver
or goods or other things of value. When
God assumes human form and is engaged
in fulfilling His promise to save the
helpless, His limitless power comes into
play.
