King, Dasaratha received Viswamitra
as Indra would welcome Brahma and
touching his feet, the King said: "I am
indeed blessed among men. Your coming
can only be due to the merit of my
ancestors. Like the morning sun that
dispels the darkness of night, your face
brings joy to my sight. My heart is full.
Born a king, you have become through
tapas a Brahma Rishi. And you yourself
have come seeking my dwelling. Is there
anything in my power that I can do for
you? If so, command and I shall obey."
Viswamitra was rejoiced to hear these
words of Dasaratha, and his face
brightened. He said: "O King, your words 
are worthy of you. Born in the Ikshvaku
line, with Vasishtha for your Guru, what
else could you say? You have said 'yes'
before I asked. This fills my heart with
joy." And he straightway explained the
purpose of his visit.
Viswamitra said: "I am engaged in
performing a sacrifice. As it nears
completion, two powerful Rakshasas,
Maricha and Subahu, defile it. They
shower unclean blood and flesh on the
sacred fire. Like other rishis we could
curse and destroy them. But that would be 
a waste of all our tapas.
"Our troubles will end if you send with
me Rama, the eldest of your warlike sons. 
Under my care, he will grow in princely
stature. He will surely defeat these
Rakshasas and his name will gather lustre. 
Entrust Rama to my care only for a few
days. Do not refuse my request. Fulfil the 
promise you gave me unsought. Of
Rama's safety you need have no anxiety.
You will earn undying fame in the three
worlds. Vasishtha and your ministers will
agree with what I say."
Dasaratha trembled with fear and
anxiety. He had a hard choice to make;
either to give his well-beloved son to be
killed by the Rakshasas or himself incurs
the terrible anger of Viswamitra.
For a few moments, Dasaratha stood
speechless, for he was stunned and
bewildered. But recovering from the
shock, he begged the sage not to press his 
demand, and said: "Rama is not yet fully
sixteen years of age. How can he fight
with Rakshasas? Of what use is it to send 
him with you? What does he know of the 
wiles of Rakshasas? It is not right that I
should send a mere lad to fight them, I am 
here, and my army is ready to march. 
How can a lad protect you and your yaga? 
Tell me all about your foes. I shall go with 
you at the head of my army and do your 
bidding and serve your need. Do tell me
about these desecrators."
Viswamitra described Maricha and
Subahu and Ravana their master. And he 
demanded again that Rama should be sent 
along with him.
Dasaratha persisted in refusal. "Parting
from Rama will be death to me," he said. 
"I shall go with you, I and my army. Why, 
it seems to me the task proposed is pretty 
hard even for me. How then can my son
cope with it? Indeed, I cannot send him. If 
you please, I am ready with my army."
Dasaratha's attempt to go back on his
hasty word, enraged Viswamitra. The
King's pleas and reasons were like oil
poured on the fire of his anger.
"This conduct is unworthy of your
lineage", the sage said. 'Tell me if this is
your final word. I shall go back the way I 
came. Long may you live with your kith
and kin, having swerved from the path of
Truth!"
The earth quaked and the gods were
afraid of the possible consequences of the 
sage's wrath.
Vasishtha now turned to the King and
spoke gently: "It ill becomes you, King, to 
refuse having promised once. Born in the
Ikshvaku line, you cannot do it. Having
once said, 'I will do', you have no option
but to do it. Failing, you will lose the
merit of all your great gifts and deeds.
Send Rama with the sage, and send
Lakshmana too. You need have no fear
for their safety, When they are protected
by Viswamitra, no Rakshasa can hurt
them. As the drink of the gods, shielded
by the wheel of fire, so will Rama be by
Viswamitra. You have no idea of
Viswamitra's power; he is tapas in human
form. Bravest of the brave and wisest of
the wise, he is master of every weapon. In 
the three worlds there is not, and there
will never be, any to equal him in martial
or spiritual prowess. When he was king he 
obtained from the gods mastery of all
weapons. He beholds the past, the present 
and the future. Then why does he want the 
princes, you may wonder. He can well
take care himself of his yaga; but it is for 
the good of your sons that he has come
here and appears to seek your help. Do not 
hesitate. Send your sons with him."
Listening to the wise Vasishtha,
Dasaratha saw things clearly and made up 
his mind to send Rama and Lakshmana.
The two princes were then brought to
the presence of the sage. The King, the
Queen-Mothers and Vasishtha blessed
them and sent them with Viswamitra.
A pleasant breeze wafted and flowers
were strewn by the denizens of the
heavens. Auspicious sounds were heard.
Bow in hand, the two lads strode proudly
on either side of the Sage.
Valmiki and Kamban revel in this
picture of the two handsome princes
marching out to their first adventure under 
the guardianship of a great rishi who had
also been a renowned warrior a teacher
who could create a new world; and beside 
him, head erect, two princely pupils born
to end the Rakshasa race.
With swords of victory hanging from
their waists, bows and quivers mounted on 
strong shoulders, they moved, each like a
three-headed cobra with uplifted hood.