SUGRIVA was keen on regaining his
kingdom and family, but he could not see 
how this was to be. Vali's strength stood
as an impossible barrier between him and
the fulfilment of his desire.
Hanuman, his minister, tried to
convince him that is would succeed with
Rama's help, but Sugriva's doubts
persisted. Could Rama's strength
overcome Vali's? It all looked hopelessly
impossible. Vali's body was like steel.
How was Rama going to kill him?
Sugriva had these doubts about Rama.
But he had none else to help him. And he 
was not prepared to give up his desire. He 
decided to test Rama's strength.
But how is one to subject a friend to a 
test without discourteously betraying one's
suspicion? Rama had promised to get the
thing done. How was an occasion to be
created to measure his ability? Sugriva
thought long and formed a plan.
He told Rama softly: "My Lord Rama! 
Your words have banished sorrow from
my heart. I know your valor. An arrow
from your bow can destroy the three
worlds. How can Vali's frame stand
against it? Still it is my duty to tell you all
about Vali's strength. He can go round to 
the four oceans to take up in his palm and 
sip the water with the morning prayers.
He can toss and play with a heavy rock as 
if it were a ball. He can pull out mighty
forest trees as if they were blades of grass. 
Once Dundubhi, an Asura in buffalo form
possessing the strength of a thousand
elephants, challenged Ocean to a fight.
Ocean evaded saying: 'You should fight
with an equal. There in the north stands
Himavan. Go and challenge him. Leave
poor me alone'. Dundubhi agreed and,
speeding northwards, met and challenged
Himavan, going his rocky side with his
horns. Himavan controlled his temper and
said: 'Why do you assault me? I am not a 
fighter. I spend my life in the company of
sages who love to stay with me.'
Dundubhi answered: 'Very well, then. But
tell me of some one I can fight with. I
want a worthy foeman today.' Himavan
said: 'There is one in the south who is a
foe worthy of you. He is Vali, the Vanara 
King. His strength is like his father
Indra's. If you care, you may go to him
and challenge him to fight.' Dundubhi
went straight to Vali's place and raised a
loud uproar at the entrance of Kishkindha. 
He tore up trees and pulled down the gate 
and roared, 'Come out and prove your
strength in a fight with me.' Vali was then
resting with his queen. On hearing the
challenge he came out accompanied by
the women of his palace. 'Why, O
Dundubhi, do you raise this clamor at my
city gate?' be asked. 'Are you tired of life?' 
Vali's scornful address enraged the Asura
who said: 'Don't boast of your strength in
the presence of your admiring women. I
have come here for a fight with you. If
you have any manliness in you, come out
and show it. You will say you are too
drunk now to fight; but I am willing to
wait till you become sober. If you like you 
may spend the night in your pleasures and 
bid a tearful leave of all your dear ones
and come to me in the morning to be slain 
by me.' Vali laughed at Dundubhi's words 
and said: 'My dear women, go inside. O
Asura, I am not the worse for drink and if 
you want a fight, there is no time like the 
present. The drinks I have had are what
the warrior takes before he goes into
battle!' So saying and with a laugh he took 
hold of the Asura by his tail and whirled 
him round and flung him. Dundubhi spat
blood and fell on the ground. After a
while the Asura rose again and a great
battle followed. Vali, son of Indra,
pounded the Asura to death. And he flung
the dead buffalo so that it fell on the
ground at the distance of a yojana. Drops 
of blood from the Asura's body were
carried by the wind and fell on the
ashrama of Matanga. The sage was wroth
and soon found out who was responsible
for this contamination. He saw at once
that Vali in his pride had flung a bleeding
carcass and desecrated the holy spot. The 
sage pronounced a curse, 'If this Vali
enters the precincts of this ashrama, he
will lose his life.' That is why, O Rama,
with my friends I am living here in safety. 
Vali dare not approach this place for fear 
of the curse. Look at these sal trees. He
can pluck one of them and just shake all
the leaves off as one dusts a jacket. Such
is his strength. How could I, having
incurred this terrible brother's enmity, feel
secure?"
Lakshmana understood that Sugriva
needed a demonstration of Rama's
prowess to give him confidence and he
said: "How would you like Rama to show
you his confidence to conquer Vali?"
Sugriva answered: "Indeed, I have no
doubts. I know Rama's prowess though
now it is hidden as embers in ashes. I have 
sought refuge under him. And yet, when I 
recall Vali's mighty deeds, I tremble. That
is all."
Seeing Sugriva's faith in him and his
great fear of Vali, Rama resolved to put an 
end to his doubts. By a playful flip of his 
toe he sent the enormous skeleton of
Dundubhi which was lying there, flying in
the air to a distance of ten yojanas. But
Sugriva though impressed was not
convinced. "When my brother sent
Dundubhi's carcass hurling in the sky, it
was full of flesh and blood and far heavier
than this weather-beaten skeleton," he
said.
Then Rama bent his bow and, pulling
the string to his ear, sent forth an arrow. It 
pierced the sal tree pointed out by Sugriva 
and six other trees standing behind it.
Piercing the seven trees the beautiful
arrow touched the earth and returned to
Rama's quiver.
Sugriva, seeing this, was beside
himself with joy. He was now certain that 
Rama's arrow could pierce the adamant
frame of Vali. He fell prostrate before
Rama and said: "With my own eyes I have 
now seen your prowess. Even if all the
gods with Indra at their head should come 
and oppose you, your victory is certain.
Why then talk of Vali? I have gained your 
friendship and I have no more use for fear 
or grief. Slay Vali and save me. Let us go 
to Kishkindha today."
Both Rama and Lakshmana agreed.
They talked how to set about and it was
finally agreed that Sugriva should appear
in Kishkindha and challenge Vali to single
combat. Vali was sure to come out, and as 
the brothers were fighting, Rama would
kill Vali with an arrow. They proceeded to 
Kishkindha. Sugriva went ahead. Rama
followed him and stood away behind a
tree in the dense forest.
Sugriva shouted. Vali heard the shout
and in great rage emerged from the
fortress, radiant like the morning sun.
The two brothers fought each other
fiercely.
But Rama, who was standing bow in
hand behind a tree, was bewildered. As
they wrestled together the brothers were
so similar in form and feature, in
equipment and method of fighting, that
Rama could not distinguish Vali from
Sugriva and was afraid to shoot lest he kill 
the wrong combatant.
Meantime Sugriva, having the worst of
the fight, broke from his brother's grip
with a desperate effort and, wounded and 
weary, disappointed and despondent, fled
for life and reached Rishyamuka forest.
Even this he was able to do because
Vali did not wish to slay him and was not 
unwilling to give his brother another lease
of life.
Rama and Lakshmana rejoined the
woebegone Sugriva. He looked down at
the ground without lifting his eyes. He
was angry that Rama had broken his word 
and failed to help him.
"If you did not like to kill Vali," said
Sugriva, "you could have told me so
earlier. In that case, I, who know Vali's
might, would never have challenged him
to fight. On the contrary, you made me
believe you, and I have had such a
drubbing that it is a wonder I am alive."
"Do not be angry, Sugriva, but listen,"
said Rama. "There was a good reason why 
I could not send forth my deadly arrow.
You and Vali were alike in height and
girth, in gait and shouts, in dress and
ornaments. Once the fight began, I could
not tell you from Vali. And I stood
bewildered and helpless. It would have
been terrible if I killed you instead of
Vali. Do not be angry. Challenge Vali
once again. This time I shall surely slay
him. Here, Lakshmana, fetch that
flowering creeper. Tie it round Sugriva's
neck as a garland. I shall then know who 
is our friend and who is Vali as they fight. 
Now, Sugriva, you shall see Vali rolling
on the ground."
Sugriva was satisfied. His spirits
recovered. Lakshmana tied the creeper
round his neck. Once again, and
handsomer than ever, Sugriva proceeded
to Kishkindha. And Rama and Lakshmana 
followed him as before.