BESIDE themselves with joy at the
sight of Hanuman, the Vanaras assembled
on the Mahendra peak. And the veteran
Jambavan welcoming the son of Vayu
with great affection, spoke on behalf of
all.
"We are eager to hear a full account of 
your journey and its triumphant
conclusion. More particularly, we are
anxious to know how you discovered Sita. 
How is she now? What is the state of her 
mind and body? And dear son of Anjana, 
tell us about Ravana's state and behavior.
After knowing everything we shall be in a 
position to consider and decide what
needs to be done next. "
Hanuman tendered mental salutations
to Sita and began his story.
"You know how I sprang into the sky
from this peak. As I was flying over the
sea, a golden mountain rose suddenly
above the surface of the water. I thought it 
was something rising up to obstruct me
and I gave it a flick with my tail. Meekly
receiving the blow, the mountain said in a 
sweet voice: 'My son, I am no enemy. I 
was saved by your father from the dire
wrath of Indra and am ever greateful to
him. I now live in safety sheltered by the
sea. In olden days, we mountains had
wings and flew hither and thither in the
sky and the world was in dread of us.
Then Indra, to rid the world of this terror, 
relentlessly pursued us and cut off our
wings. It was from this common fate that
your father rescued me. You are engaged
in the most fatiguing task of flying across
the sea. I have come up here to offer you 
some rest. Stay here for a while and then
fulfil Rama's purpose.' I declined the offer 
for lack of time and, taking leave of him,
went on my way."
Thus, in proper sequence and without
omission, Hanuman recounted all that
happened during the passage and in the
city of Lanka. He told them how he
searched for Sita in vain in Ravana's 
palace, how he found her at last in the
Asoka Vana, how Ravana sought and
importuned her and was spurned by her.
He narrated what dire threats Ravana held 
out, how the Rakshasis teased her and
drove her to think of putting an end to her 
own life, and how it was at this juncture
that he approached and gave her news of
Rama and hope and interest in life. 
With tears in his eyes he told them
what a divinely precious soul Sita was and 
how nobly she had borne herself. Then he 
narrated how he destroyed the park and
killed the Rakshasa warriors, how he was 
finally bound by Indrajit and produced
before Ravana. He described what took
place at the interview, and how as a
punishment for his boldness of speech
they set fire to his tail, furnishing him
thereby with a great torch with which he
set their city ablaze.
On such occasions, when a character
has to recapitulate past events, we can see 
Valmiki's skill in retelling the story in
beautiful words. This is a source of
special pleasure to those who read the
Ramayana as a religious exercise. They do 
not dislike such repetitions. Indeed it is
one of the special charms in a large epic. 
But I have abridged the recital to suit the 
general reader who has no time or taste
for an oft-repeated tale however edifying.
Those who wish to avert some calamity or 
desire success in some great undertaking
usually make a Parayana (devotional
reading exercise) of the whole of the
Sundarakanda, the canto dealing with
Hanuman's expedition to Lanka. It is
believed that the same result can be
obtained even by a Parayana of only this
chapter where Hanuman relates to the
Vanara warriors all that happened
between his crossing and recrossing the
sea. 
After this full narration of the
happenings, Hanuman proceeded: "Our
efforts have been successful so far
because of the power of chastity of Sita
who is chastity incarnate. When I think of
her I wonder how the Rakshasa could
seize and carry her away and yet escape
being burnt to ashes. But Ravana too had 
accumulated great power through his
tapas. Even so, Sita could have reduced
him to ashes if she had chosen, but she
patiently endured all this, because she
wanted the punishment to proceed from
her lord. And now what is your advice?
Shall we go straight to Lanka, destroy
Ravana and the Rakshasa hordes, recover 
Sita and restore her to Rama? It is not as if 
we have not the strength to do this.
Single-handed I can destroy them and
leave not a trace behind. And Jambavan
too, all by himself, can utterly destroy the 
Rakshasas. And so can our Prince
Angada; and so can Panasa or Nila; so can 
Mainda and Dwivida, the sons of Asvini.
Yes, there are many among us who can
slay Ravana and the Rakshasa hordes.
Indeed I proclaimed aloud in Lanka: 'I, the 
messenger of Rama and the minister of
Sugriva, am come to destroy you.' But
while we are talking, Vaidehi, the
Goddess of purity, is there under the
Simsupa tree a closely guarded prisoner
pining with aching heart for rescue. In her 
hour of despair, I showed myself to her,
and comforted her with the assurance of
her lord's speedy arrival. Consider well
and decide what should now be done."
Angada, listening to all this, full of
indignation jumped up, saying: "I can do
it all alone. And there are so many of us 
here, eager warriors thirsting for battle. It
would be improper, after all these days, to 
go to Rama empty-handed and without
Sita. Let us go straight to Lanka, destroy
Ravana and the Rakshasa army and return
to Kishkindha with Sita in our midst."
Jambavan, old and wise, uttered a
gentle protest. "No, it is not right, dear
prince," he said. "We should report
everything to Rama and Lakshmana and
then do what they desire. Rama's purpose 
should be fulfilled in the manner that he
desires. That alone is proper."
All the Vanaras, including Hanuman
and Angada, agreed that this was the right 
thing to do. They then rose into the sky
and flew towards Kishkindha.
They alighted near the protected park
of the Vanara king. They made their way
into it, drank honey and ate fruit,
regardless of the warnings of the guards.
They indulged in unrestrained revelry and
ruined the beautiful park.
Unable to stand the riotous behavior of
the mirth-makers, Dadhimukha, Sugriva's
uncle and keeper of the royal park, hurried 
to the king and complained. 
"Your protected park has been laid
waste. The Vanaras that went south have
returned and, alighting in the garden, are
behaving outrageously. They pay no heed
to my words. On the contrary, they
assaulted and insulted me. They drank up
and ruined all the honeycombs and
plucked and ate fruit as they liked and are 
now lying senseless as a result of their
revelry. The trees and plants are all in
ruins. The king should forthwith inflict
suitable punishment on these
undisciplined Vanaras." 
Sugriva understood the position at
once. "Lakshmana, it is clear that
Hanuman, Jambavan and Angada have
succeeded in their search and are
celebrating their triumph in this manner."
Saying this he turned to Dadhimukha and
said to him: "Send them all here at once."
Dadhimukha now understood the real
state of affairs and, hastening to the
Vanaras, conveyed to them the king's
command.