SUGRIVA'S conjecture was like nectar 
to Rama's ears. They eagerly awaited the
arrival of the Vanaras. In a short while a
great clamor was in the air and the Vanara 
hordes alighted with cries of triumph.
Hanuman and Angada leading, the
Vanaras marched to the presence of their
king who with Rama and Lakshmana was 
awaiting their coming.
Hanuman bowed and said: "Seen have
I the Goddess of purity, your queen. She
is safe and well in Lanka. I salute her
from here across space." And he turned
southwards and offered worshipful
salutation.
Thus succinctly did Hanuman convey
to the prince the glad news that Sita was 
found and was well in body and mind.
Sugriva and Lakshmana, beside
themselves with joy, embraced Rama.
"Dear Vanara friends," exclaimed the
Prince of Ayodhya, "tell me where exactly
Sita is. How is she? How did you manage 
to see her? Tell me everything in detail."
His eager inquiries came quick upon one
another.
The other Vanaras turned to Hanuman
who stood behind, and asked him to
narrate all that he had seen and done.
Hanuman began to tell the tale. With his
unrivalled courage and strength and
single-handed, he had performed a mighty
task. Yet he did not push himself forward 
into the presence of Prince Rama or King
Sugriva, but gave precedence to Angada
and the aged Jambavan and the others,
and was silent until they asked him to
speak.
Indeed, generally, great men who dare
and do mighty deeds are disinclined to
speak about their exploits. In painting this 
scene the poet brings out this law of
natural conduct. Another thing to note
here is Hanuman's reverence for Sita.
From the time he first saw her, his
reverence for Sita appeared to surpass
even his devotion to Rama, if the two 
could be distinguished. This is the case
with all pious devotees who regard and
worship the Supreme as Mother. When
that aspect of the All immanent Power is
before true devotees, their reverence
becomes ecstatic like the child's joy in the 
mother's lap.
"Crossing the hundred yojanas of
water, I reached the city of the wicked
Ravana on the southern shore. There, in a 
park attached to the palace, I saw Sita held 
prisoner and closely guarded. It was
wonderful to see her emaciated form. She 
maintained life only in the thought of her
lord and repetition of his name. Cruel and 
ugly Rakshasis surrounded her. I saw her
lying on the ground, her hair unkempt and 
her face clouded by sorrow and care.
When I reached there, she had resolved to 
put an end to her life to escape from the 
Rakshasa king's importunities and threats.
I began uttering praises of your glory in a 
low voice. Unknown to her, and a mere
monkey, I had to secure her confidence
first. Then I spoke to her. I told her of the 
alliance between King Sugriva and
yourself. I told her of your great grief and 
unchanging love. This filled her with
sweet sorrow and awakened hope in her
and the desire to live. Asked for a token
which I might convey to you, the angel of
purity gave me this jewel to be given to
you. She also told me how once a crow
had troubled her while you were asleep
and how you were grieved about it, she
asked me to remind you of the incident.
She wanted me to remind you of another
occasion when, roaming among the hills,
perspiration had made the tilak trickle
down her forehead and you replaced it
with red ochre rubbed out of a rock. She 
bade me tell you that she would struggle
and keep alive for a month, but then she
would perish at the hands of Ravana, or
she would seek her own release of death.
She bade me convey her respects to the
Vanara King. Now let us think and make 
preparations at once for proceeding to
Lanka to redeem the princess."
Saying this, he handed the sikhamani,
crest-jewel, of Sita to the prince.
Rama took the jewel from Hanuman's 
hand and at the sight of it fainted, racked 
beyond bearing between extremes of joy
and grief. 
He pressed the jewel to his bosom and 
cried: "O Lakshmana!" Again he
embraced Hanuman and said: "Heroic son
of Vayu, blessed are you who have seen
Sita. I too see her now before me. You
have, indeed, brought her to me."
"Dear hero, my heart's friend!" he cried 
"tell me everything again in full. Tell me
once again what Sita said. Let me hear her 
words which are sweet like water to
parched lips."
Hanuman narrated the whole story to
the eager listeners and Rama wept when
Hanuman repeated these words of Sita:
"Many Rakshasas has my Rama slain,
but why has he not come here yet to slay
Ravana and save me from my sufferings?
Why has he not sent brave Lakshmana to 
slay the wretch? It cannot be that my lord 
has grown indifferent towards me! For I
know of no wrong I have ever committed 
in thought or word or deed to lose his
love."
Hanuman said: "I tried to console her
saying: 'Rama is ever thinking of' you and 
grieving for you. He knows no rest. Do
not imagine that Rama and Lakshmana
have forgotten you. No words of mine
could describe their grief. Now that I am
going to tell them you are here, it will not 
be long before they come and destroy
Ravana and return with you in triumph to 
Ayodhya.' It was then she untied the jewel 
from a knot in a corner of her sari and
gave it to me. I placed it on my head in
reverence and, securing it, started to
return. She stopped me and uttered a
benediction again and said: 'Friend
Hanuman convey the news of my welfare
to the lions, my lord and his brother, to
king Sugriva and his ministers. Devise
your plans and help him to come here and 
redeem me. I trust in you, Hanuman,
absolutely. May God bless you."
"Lay aside your grief, my Lord,"
continued Hanuman, "and think out now
what has to be done. Sita doubted how
you and the Vanara army could cross the 
sea. I assured her that she need have no
fear or doubt on that score, since, by no
means the strongest among the Vanaras, I 
myself had crossed it as she could see. I 
said to her that I myself could carry Rama 
and Lakshmana on my shoulders and
cross the sea and bring them there."