RAMA heard Hanuman with heart and
eyes overflowing and, when he had come
to the end of his narrative, said:
"The deed done by Hanuman none else 
in the world could even conceive of
attempting, crossing the sea, entering
Lanka protected by Ravana and his
formidable hosts and accomplishing the
task set him by his king not only fully but 
beyond the fondest hopes of all."
And it saddened him to think that it
was not in his power to reward Hanuman
at all adequately for the supreme joy he
had brought. "O Hanuman, let this
embrace of mine stand as an
acknowledgment of all that my heart feels
of gratitude for your great service to me."
So saying while his whole being
thrilled with grateful love, he took
Hanuman into his arms and clasped him to 
his breast.
"Sugriva," he said, "Hanuman has
indeed wrought a wonder. He entered
Lanka so strongly guarded by the
Rakshasas. He has discovered Sita and, by 
consoling her, preserved her life. Bringing
back good news of her, he has saved my
life also. But how are we now going to
cross the sea? How can our huge army
reach the other shore? Before we can
attack Ravana's city and the Rakshasa's
army, we have first to cross the sea. I see 
no way of doing it. Our joy in Hanuman's 
achievement and the good news he has
brought is overlaid by anxiety about our
future course."
But the Vanara king said: "What is
this, my Lord Rama? What need is there 
for dejection? Here are my warriors, ready 
to lay down their lives for you and let it be 
our joy to transport you and Lakshmana to 
Lanka. Have no doubt that we can do it. 
The moment Hanuman saw Lanka, you
may take it the fortress has fallen. Doubt 
only makes the warrior weak and afraid
and should be cast aside. Our victory is
certain. The feeling of confidence in my
heart at this moment is a good enough
omen for me." 
Thus Sugriva reassured Rama, and
inspired him to action. Then Rama and
Hanuman discussed matters about Lanka,
the town, the fort, the moat and other
defences. Understanding this, Hanuman
described the wealth of Lanka, the happy
lives of the Rakshasas, their confidence in
Ravana and their affection for him.
He told Rama of the might and size of 
Ravana's army; the strength and structure
of the fortress; the alertness of the sentry; 
the moats, walls and gates, catapults and
drawbridges, the care and thoroughness of
all the arrangements for defence. He also
explained how the coast too was carefully 
guarded so that no enemy ship could
approach it.
"And yet you may be certain," he said, 
"our Vanara army is fully equal to the
conquest of Lanka. We have with us
peerless warriors like Angada, Dwivida,
Mainda, Jambavan, Panasa, Nala and
Nila. We have an enormous army. We
shall fly in the sky and without touching
the ground destroy Lanka. Its mountains
and forest defences are nothing to us. We 
shall raze the city to the ground. Fix the
auspicious time and give us the order to
start."
Under the star of triumph, Uttara
Phalguni, at high noon, the army set
forward towards the southern sea. Good
omens greeted them.
As they marched, Rama, Sugriva and
Lakshmana went conversing with one
another. "If only Sita could know that we 
have set out," said Rama, "it would
encourage her to keep life going."
Scouts who knew the way went ahead, 
looking out for enemies lying in ambush.
They led the army through regions that
could provide food and drink for the huge 
army. With speed the army crossed
mountains and forests.
The Vanaras sometimes carried Rama
and Lakshmana on their shoulders so that
the march might be speedy. Every
moment the enthusiasm of the Vanaras
increased. They jumped and roared and
sported. Rama could hear them saying to
one another: "I shall kill Ravana! I shall
meet and kill Ravana!"
Nila and Kumuda went ahead
reconnoitering in front of the army. Strong
warriors were kept in the rear, guarding it 
from behind. King Sugriva, Rama and
Lakshmana were in the middle. Rama
gave strict orders that the army should
inflict no harm or hardship on the towns
and villages on the way. The noise of the 
marching army was like the roar of the sea 
and filled the eight quarters. The dust they
raised covered the sky. 
When they came to the Mahendra
Mountain, Rama climbed the peak and
surveyed the sea.
"We should now think and decide," he
said, "how the army can cross the sea. Till 
then let it camp and rest in the forest."
And Sugriva passed the order to the
commanders. The Vanaras camped in the
forest by the seashore.
When Sugriva, Rama and Lakshmana
had satisfied themselves that the whole
army had settled in comfort, the two
brothers retired apart.
Rama said: "If a person loses a dear
thing, people say that time will enable him
to forget about it and he will cease to
grieve. But Lakshmana, this is not what I
find."
Dejection again seized Rama for the
thought of Sita and her condition preyed
on his mind now more than ever before.
"When Ravana seized Sita and carried
her off," Rama said, breaking down with
fresh grief, "she must have cried aloud 'Ha 
my Lord! Ha Rama! Ha Lakshmana!' But 
she saw no one coming. We failed to go to 
her help. Every time I think of the
suffering she then must have gone
through, my grief swells up afresh. What
am I to do? Like the limbs of one who has 
drunk poison, my whole body burns with
pain. She is held in the grip of the cruel
Rakshasis and she is in great anguish.
Janaka's daughter, the bride who entered
the home of great Dasaratha, she lies on
the bare ground, a prisoner surrounded by
Rakshasis!"
"Rama!" said Lakshmana, "cease from
sorrow. Soon we shall destroy Ravana and 
rescue Sita and take her home to
Ayodhya. She will enter the city like the
goddess of chastity. Give up your grief.
Arm yourself with courage."