THE Vanara army descended from
Mount Suvela and entered the forest
adjoining the city of Lanka. As the army
burst in like a flood the frightened beasts
and birds in the forest fled in all
directions.
Valmiki describes the scene and the
event in his characteristic style. Gazing
now from below at the mountain fortress
and the divinely beautiful city constructed
by Viswakarma, Rama was again filled
with wonder and exclaimed:
"Oh what beauty! What wealth."
The Vanaras, for their part, noted the
Rakshasa warriors' strength and readiness
for battle, the thick walls and mighty
engines of defence.
From Lanka, all ready for war, the
sounds of drums and trumpets issuing
from the city increased the eagerness of
the Vanaras for battle. The army stood in
ordered divisions as instructed by Rama.
Looking at Lanka he said:
"Lakshmana! Look at the beauty of the
city."
His mind turned to Sita. She would
have known by now, he thought, of his
arrival with the army and her depressed
heart must have revived. But he spoke
nothing of this and engaged himself in the
arrangements for the army.
Suddenly, and without any noise or
warning to any one, Sugriva sprang up
into the sky and alighted on the terrace on 
top of tower in Lanka, where he saw
Ravana seated clad in red royal robes like 
a thick black cloud seen in the red evening 
sky. The scar caused by the tusk of Indra's 
elephant, shone like a crescent moon on
his chest.
"Ravana! You are caught!" cried
Sugriva. "I am a friend and servant of
Rama. This is your last day!"
And he sprang on him, knocked off his 
crown and gave him a mighty blow. The
two wrestled together for a long time.
Both were experts in wrestling. All the
tricks of that science were tried by each.
Ravana was at the end of his resources
and so he discarded wrestling and took to 
magic and Sugriva seeing this
disentangled himself and sprang back to
where Rama was. 
The Vanara leaders, who saw the son
of Surya return, shouted praises and made 
a great noise of congratulations at this
daring-do, rash and reckless no doubt, but 
such as would give the Rakshasas some
idea of the mettle of the foes they were up 
against.
Rama too was glad to see that Sugriva 
had returned safe. Observing bleeding
wounds on his body, he said:
"Sugriva! I am filled with wonder and
joy at this, your valorous exploit. But
what you did was not right. It is not for a 
king to rush into risks. How could you
suddenly and without consulting anyone
take such a dangerous course?" 
Sugriva confessed his fault. 
"True, it was improper to rush into
battle without consulting you. But when I
saw the villain who had insulted Sita I
was overwhelmed by anger and forgot my
duty."
The Vanara army surrounded Lanka on
all sides in the manner laid down by
Rama.
Rama sent for Angada and said to him:
"Prince! Take this message from me to 
Ravana. Tell him: 'Great sinner, your end
is approaching. Rama waits at your
fortress gate, ready for battle. Trusting to 
the boons of the gods, you have become
proud and wicked. You have troubled the 
world too long and committed too many
heinous sins. The time has now come for
the world to be cleansed of you. If you
come out into the open and fight and die
in battle, your sins will be washed away
and you will gain a place in the world
above as a hero. But if you love your life, 
humbly restore Sita to her lord and beg for 
forgiveness. Then you can escape with
life. Whatever happens, you are fit to be
king no longer. The kingdom of Lanka
now belongs to Vibhishana. He is worthy
to rule and protect his people. If you are 
not willing to surrender and seek safety,
then have your obsequies performed in
advance. Bid final farewell to all your
dear possessions in Lanka. Prepare for
death. Come out and meet Rama in battle.' 
Go, Angada, deliver this message to
Ravana." 
As instructed by Rama, bold Angada
delivered his message: "Listen, Ravana. I
am the son of Vali whom you no doubt
remember. I have come as Rama's
messenger. The time for your liberation
from sin has come. You may, if you
choose, die in battle and attain the swarga 
of brave men, cleansed of your foul sins.
But if life is dear to you, you may beg it 
of Rama after humble surrender, and he
never refuses mercy to a suppliant. If what 
I have heard about you is true, you will
elect to fight, which means you choose to 
die. I would advise you to take last leave 
of your kinsfolk and complete your
obsequies yourself, for none of your race
will be left to perform them. Look your 
last on lovely Lanka!"
Ravana's rage flared up like a flame.
"Seize him, kill him, the villain!" he
shouted.
At once, two Rakshasas caught hold of
Angada. He rose in the sky carrying these 
two Rakshasas on either side of him and
then flung them down.
He rose higher up and, coming down
kicked and broke off the tower of the
king's palace. Then with a single leap he
returned to where Rama was.
Dazed by Angada's exploit, the
Rakshasas were filled with fear, but they
did not disclose it. Ravana, too, heaved a 
heavy sigh at the sight of the broken
turret. He looked on it as a bad omen.
As soon as Angada returned, Rama
issued orders to the army to begin the
assault on Lanka.