SUKA, the Rakshasa scout, went and
reported to Ravana: "I did my job
according to your instructions. But my
efforts were fruitless. They were rough
with me and made me feel thankful to be 
allowed to come back. Rama, to whom it 
was sport to slay Viradha, Kabandha,
Khara and others, has arrived with the
army of Sugriva. They have somehow
come to know of the place where Sita is 
held captive. The bears and monkeys have 
crossed the sea and are standing ready for 
battle before Lanka. The visible earth is
covered with this army. There is nothing
to be gained by discussions and debates. 
Their strife can only be quenched with our 
blood, Oh King! Consider well what
needs to be done, and do it."
And then he added with fear, in a
suppressed voice: "We may yet escape if
Sita is restored."
Ravana was enraged. "What did you
say?" he cried. "Let no one talk to me of
Sita being restored. They do not know my 
strength who talk like this. I can slay the
gods, the Vanaras, the Gandharvas and the 
Yakshas. My darts can burn up Indra
himself and Yama too. Wait and see how
this wretched fellow Rama and his army
will be destroyed."
Ravana believed what he said. He had
dwelt long on his previous achievements
and, filled with pride, had become
foolishly obstinate.
Then he sent for two of his ministers
and told them: "Scouts have come and
reported that a large army has built a
causeway to Lanka and has come over
here. This is indeed strange news, but as
yet nothing serious has happened. Go and 
observe the enemy and bring me a full and 
detailed report of their strength."
Accordingly, the spies assumed the
shape of Vanaras and coming to Rama's
camp and mixing with the other Vanaras
looked all around. But Vibhishana,
discovering their disguise, caught hold of
them and produced them before Rama.
They pleaded that they were mere
messengers sent by their king and prayed 
for release.
Rama said: "Show them our army. Let
them have a good look around before they 
return. Give them free and full
opportunity to see our strength. And, Oh
you Rakshasa messengers! When you go
back to Ravana, tell him, 'The strength on
which you relied when you carried Sita
away is to be put now to the test. Your
fortress, your city and your army will be
destroyed, Rama's darts will pierce your
body.' Yes, convey this message to your
king."
The spies heard Rama's words and
agreed to convey them to their master.
Then, impelled perhaps by force of habit,
they said: "Victory to thee!" The Vanara
army took this to be a fine omen.
The spies went back to Ravana and
said: "O King! We were discovered by
Vibhishana and were in fear of death but
Rama would not let them kill us and he
ordered our release. King! Our enemies
are determined. Rama and Lakshmana,
Sugriva the Vanara king and Vibhishana,
they are all of one mind. It is difficult for 
us to prevail against an army led by such
warriors. We have seen Rama, son of
Dasaratha. He impressed us as being by
himself strong enough to destroy our city
and army. We have seen the courage of
the Vanaras and their eagerness for battle. 
It is not expedient to try the fortune of war 
with them. It seems best to restore Sita to 
Rama. Do consider what should be done."
Of course the advice was sincere and
well meant, but Ravana could not control
his fury. He said: "Even if the whole
world turns against me, I shall not yield to 
fear. Even if all the Devas, Gandharvas
and Vanaras join together to oppose me, I 
shall not return Sita. Because you were
thrashed by the enemy, you give me this
cowardly advice. Faint hearts! Where is
the foe who can vanquish me?" 
Having said this, he went to his high
tower and himself surveyed the enemy's 
strength. His ministers and officers were
with him.
Those who had gone out to reconnoitre 
described at length the Vanara chiefs and
the army behind them. They recounted the 
strength of that huge army of bears and
monkeys gathered together from the farflung forests, mountains and river-valleys 
of the world. 
They spoke of their physical strength
and courage, their firm devotion to Rama, 
their unity and eagerness to slay the
Rakshasas. All those that had gone
confirmed this. "Look!" one of them
said. "That majestic and graceful youth
with matted locks and bow in hand is
Rama. See how he looks round him with
eyes of love and command and how his
glances seem to brighten the quarters and
to fill all with devotion and confidence.
The mighty armed warrior near him is his 
brother Lakshmana, a peerless bowman
and Rama's second soul. And look! Next
to him is Sugriva, wearing Vali's garland.
He is the equal of Vali himself. There,
next to him you see Vibhishana, your
brother. It is not easy to vanquish such
warriors. Consider well and take all steps
necessary for victory in such a situation." 
As the ministers extolled the strength
of the enemy, Ravana's rage grew more
and more furious. This is the way of a
tyrant. The wise king is never angry with
those who bring him true information or
with ministers who give him good advice
for his welfare. But now Ravana's mind
was confused. He had no use for true facts 
or good advice.
His thought followed a strange line. He 
judged Rama by his own character. He
thought that, if Sita could be made
somehow to yield to him, Rama would
return home disgraced and broken
hearted. Hence be resolved to make one
last attempt with a different technique. 
He sought the help of a Rakshasa
sorcerer. "Oh, Lightning-Tongue!" he said
(that was his name), "prepare a head
which looks so exactly like Rama's that it 
will deceive Rama's nearest and dearest
into believing it is his. When I send for
you, come to the park where Sita is
incarcerated and place it before her."
The sorcerer agreed to do as he was
bidden.
Then Ravana went once again to the
Asoka Park and tried to beguile Sita.
"Your husband and his army have been
destroyed." be said. "My warriors crossed 
the sea and attacking Rama and his
monkeys, when they were tired and
asleep, killed them all. A warrior has
brought the head of your husband for me
to see. Why do you still persist in your
obstinacy? Join my wives now and reign
as their chief. Take my advice and
become the queen of Lanka."
Then he ordered a Rakshasa to fetch
Vidyut-Jihva, the sorcerer. The conjurer
came and placed before Sita a head that
looked exactly like Rama's.
Startled by the sight, Sita cried, "So
then, is this my fate?" and broke into
hopeless lamentation.
Meanwhile, Rama's army had come
close to Lanka and the ministers and
generals sent word to Ravana desiring an
immediate interview. Ravana, therefore,
had to leave Sita at once and go to the
Assembly Hall.
Ravana's presence was necessary to
keep up the sorcerer's illusion. So, when
he left the place, the, apparition of Rama's 
head vanished like smoke. Sarama, who
was a lady of the royal household posted 
as a companion of Sita, consoled her
explaining the illusion. She said: "No one
has killed Rama. He has reached Lanka at 
the head of a great army. They have built 
a wonderful causeway across the sea and 
are all over Lanka like a submerging sea.
The Rakshasas are panic-stricken. Ravana 
is only trying to deceive you through
sorcery."
Sarama went on to inform Sita:
"Several ministers advised Ravana to
restore you and save himself by
unconditional submission. But he would
not listen to them. 'I may perish in battle,' 
he said, 'but I will not bow, a suppliant
before Rama. I shall never return Sita and 
sue for peace.' Holy lady! No harm can
come to you, Rama will surely triumph
and this wicked one will perish." 
Even as Sarama was speaking, the
noise of the drums and trumpets sounded
by the Vanara army reached Sita's ears
and filled her with joy. She knew that
Ravana's end was near. The Rakshasas in
Lanka heard the same noise and trembled 
in fear.
