THERE was wailing in every house in
Lanka. In Ravana's breast grief, shame
and anger seethed like a raging sea. He
had so far sent his commanders and men
in detachments, and, brave as they were,
they had been destroyed in detail. This
had been the result of overweening
confidence in his invincibility and
contempt for the enemy, most of whom
fought with no better weapons than sticks
and stones. But repeated reverses had
brought him no wisdom. 
He had not even disputed the passage
of the sea but allowed the enemy a
lodgment in his island. But negligent and 
reckless as a general, he was brave and
finally resolving to fight himself and with
his sole strength to destroy the foe, he set 
out. He had full faith in his prowess and in 
the efficacy of the boons he had secured
and he went forth with confidence
mounted on his divine chariot that was
drawn by eight horses and filled with all
manner of weapons accompanied by a
division of Rakshasa chariot-warriors.
As Ravana issued out of Lanka, the sun 
seemed obscured by an unpredicted
eclipse, and foul birds and beasts of the
night roared at large with weird illomened cries; but disregarding it all,
Ravana drove out to battle accompanied
by Virupaksha, Mahodara and
Mahaparsva. 
The mighty Rakshasa warriors who
followed Ravana were mowed down by a 
deadly flight of arrows and chunks of
rocks and presently Ravana found himself
facing Lakshmana, who tried to oppose
his further progress. Forcing his way past
Lakshmana, Ravana precipitated himself
against Rama with all the pent-up fury of
hatred and revenge and strove to
overwhelm him with a spate of arrows. 
Rama easily baffled these arrows with
his own and struck Ravana repeatedly,
without however being able to penetrate
his armor. Thus they fought, these
supreme bowmen, each bent on slaying
the other and using increasingly potent
missiles of secret power, while the gods in
heaven looked on with marvel and
admiration. Neither hero had met such an
opponent before and on both sides
admiration was mingled with wrath.
Rama pierced with his darts every limb 
of Ravana. And yet he did not fall.
Then Lakshmana and Vibhishana
together attacked Ravana. Furious with
his brother and determined to kill him,
Ravana flung at him a powerful weapon.
But intercepted by a dart of Lakshmana it 
broke into two and fell on the ground like 
a burning brand. Once again, Ravana
aimed another mighty sakti against
Vibhishana. This too Lakshmana
intercepted. Then Ravana hurled a sakti at 
Lakshmana crying: "Now you are dead!"
Under its impact Lakshmana fell down
unconscious on the ground.
Not observing this, Rama went on
keeping up his pressure against Ravana.
While the battle raged between the two,
the Vanara leaders took counsel and sent
Hanuman once again to the Hill of Herbs
to save the life of Lakshmana.
For the second time, Hanuman flew
northwards and, not wasting time
searching for the plants, returned with the
whole mountain. Lakshmana got well
again and resumed his part in the battle.
Meanwhile, Matali brought his master
Indra's chariot to the battlefield for the use 
of Rama.
"Indra, king of gods, has sent this for
your use," said Matali. "Be pleased to
ascend this chariot and destroy Ravana,
the enemy of the gods!"
Rama bowed to the gods,
circumambulated the divine chariot and
ascended it. Then followed a wonderful
battle.
Sorely wounded, Ravana fell 
unconscious and, noting this, his
charioteer quietly took him out of the
battlefield.
When, a little later, Ravana recovered
consciousness, he was highly wroth, with
his charioteer for taking him out of the
battlefield and insisted on being taken
back to face Rama. The grim battle began 
again. Every astra was met by another. In
new and wonderful ways, the two chariots 
moved and the two warriors fought for a
long time, while both armies watched the
spectacle with breathless admiration and
anxiety.
Matali, the charioteer, whispered into
Rama's ear: "The Rakshasa's end is
approaching. Delay no further. May I
remind you of Brahma-astra?"
Rama uttered the spell and sent the
Brahma-astra. Though the Rakshasa's ten
heads had often been cut off before, they
had grown again and baffled Rama. The
Brahma-astra, emitting flames, went
towards Ravana and pierced his chest,
where was enshrined the secret of his
invincibility, and shattered it.
Then the bow slipped from the
Rakshasa's hand and he fell down from
the chariot and lay stretched on the
battlefield.
The gods blew their trumpets. Rama
and his chariot were covered by a heap of 
flowers showered from the heavens.
Lakshmana, Vibhishana, Jambavan and
other warriors surrounded Rama, lost in
joy and adoration.
When the first flush of triumph was
over and Vibhishana looked at his
brother's body, the natural call of blood
and memories of boyhood days when
Ravana and he had loved and played quite 
overwhelmed him and he burst into
lamentations over his lost brother.
"O warrior!" he cried. "O brother of
heroic deeds! O scholar learned in all
Shastras! O valiant and famous King of
kings! Your great arms are, now
sprawling helpless on the ground! Selfwilled and self-deceived, surrounded by
bad advisers, you would not heed my
warning! The worst I feared has happened 
now! You reaped what you sowed and
you lie on the bare ground, O once mighty 
ruler of the Rakshasas!"
To Vibhishana thus lamenting, Rama
spoke:
"Ravana fought like a true warrior and
fell fighting like a hero! Death has washed 
his sins. It calls for no mourning. Ravana
has entered Heaven."
Rama cleared all confusion from
Vibhishana's mind and bade him do the
funeral rites for his departed brother.
Said Rama: "It is for you now, his
brother, to do the rites. Death ends all 
enmity. I, his former foe, even I can
rightly perform his obsequies. Your
brother is my brother too, is he not?"
The women of Ravana's palace came to 
the field to mourn. They led the Queen
Mandodari, who looked like the goddess
of grief incarnate. The crowned queen and 
beloved wife of Ravana was in utter
desolation.
"Indra, King of gods, dared not face
your anger," she cried. "The Rishis and
the Gandharvas at the very sight of you
fled in fear in all directions. And now a
mere man, a wanderer in the forest, has
brought you down! I do not understand
how this could have happened. Truly, Fate 
is all-powerful! But lord, my lord, I
warned you long ago. Did I not tell you
that this Rama is no mere human being,
but someone greater than Indra or Agni or 
Yama, whom you could not vanquish?
This Rama is no other than Vishnu
Himself in human form, God without
beginning, middle or end. Even when we
heard that he stood on the ground riding
no car and slew your brother Khara in
Janasthana, did I not say this? When
Hanuman penetrated Lank the
impenetrable fortress, and laid it waste, I
knew the truth. I begged you not to incur 
their enmity but you would not listen.
Why did you cast lustful eyes on chaste
Sita? This was the madness that drove you 
to your death! Was it not a heinous sin to 
carry her off when she was alone? Death
in the form of Sita drew you to your end! 
Sita and Rama are now reunited and
happy after their brief separation. But me
and all our race you have thrust for very
into the depths of sorrow. Alas, my
husband, my lover. You lie dead. Yet how 
beautiful you look with your body pierced 
by Rama's darts, covered with blood and
dust of battle! What should I do now? I
had a lord who was the Lord of Lanka! I 
had a son who had vanquished Indra.
They have left me and I am a mere
helpless widow without friends or home!" 
Lamenting thus, Mandodari fell on
Ravana's body and lay unconscious.