All arrangements for Janaka's yaga had 
been completed and to Mithila had come
many rishis and Brahman's from various
kingdoms. Viswamitra and the princes
were duly welcomed. Janaka's preceptor,
Satananda, was the first to pay honor to
Viswamitra. Janaka followed him.
The King said to the sage: "I am indeed 
blessed that you should attend my yaga."
Pointing to Rama and Lakshmana,
Janaka asked Viswamitra: "Who are these 
god-like youths who resemble each other,
and carry their weapons with the proud
ease of seasoned warriors? Who is the
happy father of such sons?"
Viswamitra told Janaka that they were
the sons of King Dasaratha. He narrated
how they had protected his own yaga and 
destroyed the Rakshasas. "They have
come here," the sage went on, "to see, if 
they may, the great bow of Rudra in your 
palace." Janaka understood the meaning
of Viswamitra's words and rejoiced.
The King said: "The prince is welcome 
to see the bow. If he can string it, he will
win the hand of my daughter. Many were 
the princes who saw this bow and went
back, unable even to move it. I shall
indeed be happy if this prince succeeds
where so many have failed and I am
thereby enabled to give Sita to him."
Janaka then ordered his men to bring
the bow which was kept safe and sacred in 
an iron box. It was brought on an eightwheeled carriage and dragged like a
temple chariot during a festival.
"Here," said Janaka, "is Rudra's bow
worshipped by me and my ancestors. Let
Rama see this bow."
After obtaining permission from
Viswamitra and the King, Rama stepped
out to the iron bow-case, while all eyes
were fixed on him in wishful expectation.
Opening the box, he lifted the bow
effortlessly, as if it were a garland of
flowers, and resting one end of it against
his toe, he bent and strung it and drew the 
string back with such irresistible force that 
the mighty bow snapped with a crash like 
a clap of thunder. And there fell from
heaven a shower of flowers.
Janaka proclaimed: "My beloved
daughter shall be wedded to this prince."
Viswamitra said to Janaka: "Send your 
swiftest messengers to Ayodhya to give
the news to Dasaratha and invite him."
Janaka's messengers reached Ayodhya
in three days. They met King Dasaratha
who was seated, like Indra, on his throne 
and said to him: "Sage Viswamitra and
King Janaka have sent you happy news.
Your son who came to Mithila has won
our princess Sita by fulfilling the
condition set for her hand. He not only
strung Rudra's bow which none before
could so much as lift, but bent its tough
pride till it broke. King Janaka eagerly 
awaits your gracious consent for the
marriage, and your presence and blessing
at the festivities. May it please you to start 
for Mithila with your retinue."
Dasaratha, who had sent Rama with
Viswamitra with a heart not altogether
free from anxiety even after the sage's
assurance, was thrilled with joy on
hearing this good news. He told his
ministers to prepare for the journey and
left the very next day for Janaka's capital.
Dasaratha and his following reached
Mithila and were received with
enthusiastic welcome. Exchange of
courtesies over, Janaka said to Dasaratha:
"My yaga will soon be over. I think it best 
to have the marriage as soon as the yaga is 
over," and sought his approval. 
Dasaratha replied: "You are the bride's
father and it is for you to order things as 
you wish."
At the appointed day and hour, giving
away the bride, King Janaka said to
Rama: "Here is my daughter, Sita, who
will ever tread with you the path of
dharma. Take her hand in yours. Blessed
and devoted, she will ever walk with you 
like your own shadow."
Iyam Sita mama suta
sahadharmacharee tava
prateechchha chainam bhadram
te
panim grihneeshwa panina
pativrata mahabhaga
chhayevanugata sada.
This sloka is uttered in every wedding
in upper India when the bride is given
away.
Thus was Sita given by Janaka to
Rama. Were they not Eternal Lovers
reunited? And so they rejoiced like lovers 
come together after separation.